everybody welcome to another episode of
impact books today we are reviewing
hitmakers by Derrick Thompson I really
enjoyed this book but I'm a little bit
tense to be reviewing it because I think
would be easy to summarize it really
briefly and it would probably be
relatively easy to summarize and just
grotesque amounts of detail but hitting
that sweet spot in the middle where I
give you enough detail to really get a
flavor for the book without overdoing it
I think is gonna be a little bit hard
but here we go here's my best take at it
alright first and foremost hitmakers are
masters of the familiar surprise and
while at the end of the day this book
really is about how difficult it is to
predict the future that notion of
familiarity is one of the most
empowering or powerful takeaways from
the book a great example of this concept
of familiarity is the Chi baat 7 now the
Chi baat 7 is a story of a well-to-do
aristocratic painter who was one of the
French Impressionists who was painting
alongside Monet and other people that
became a part of the impressionist Canon
and the fascinating thing about the
story is when people really break down
and look at what ended up becoming the
Canon and why those painters versus
other painters that were popular at the
time why they end up being the one's
that are remembered really comes down to
they were the ones the 7 that this guy
Chi bought was collecting he had the
means to be buying art as well as be
creating art and he was actually buying
some of the more obscure paintings from
relatively obscure painters and so how
on earth is it that they end up becoming
the most famous and this is the perfect
example of familiarity so what happened
was when Kai Bhat passed away he gifted
his collection to the National Museum
but he had one stipulation if they were
going to accept the gifts of these
paintings they had to hang them and this
created massive controversy and people
thought you know who is this guy to
mandate what's gonna be hung in the
National Gallery now keep in mind these
weren't his paintings it wasn't like he
was promoting you know hey if you're
gonna take these other ones and you have
to hang up mind these were paintings
done by his friends so they weren't any
of his own paintings
in fact it was Monet that ultimately
convinced the National Gallery to take
half of them but in all of this uproar
over him having the audacity to say that
they had to hang these these paintings
got notoriety people just became more
and more familiar with them because they
were caught up in this controversy and
merely becoming more famous for this
controversy when somebody would walk
through the museum and see them there
would be the sense of familiarity oh I
know that painting and that sense of
recognition made the painting seem more
important which led into them becoming
the most famous of the French
Impressionists and you get a very
similar story with them with the Mona
Lisa the Mona Lisa now is considered to
be the most famous painting of all time
and when people try to explain why it's
so famous the only answers they can
really give or that basically it has the
features of the Mona Lisa you know so
you'll describe what the Mona Lisa has
and that's why it's famous which really
isn't very compelling and the author
makes a very different case which is the
Mona Lisa and I actually didn't know
this but the Mona Lisa at one point had
been stolen and it went missing for like
more than a decade and in the time that
it was missing then people were like
freaking out it's a kind of example of
you don't know what you have until it's
gone and because it was missing people
are in an uproar it's a national
treasure and for it to be gone you know
is just a crime and when it finally was
recovered and restored and put back into
the museum then it really began to
become famous and later because of all
the notoriety around having gone missing
and being returned that was when it took
off in popularity so it was hundreds of
years if I'm not mistaken
before the painting really began to get
famous and later ends up being done and
not mockery but people painting versions
of it with a moustache and Andy Warhol
did a version of it and that repetition
which started with it being stolen and
returned and then getting famous as a
replica of things that people were doing
that gave it that familiarity which then
makes it seem so much more important
when you go and see and if you've ever
seen it it's
a little bit underwhelming it's not a
very big painting and compared to some
of the other brighter flashy er
paintings that you'll see in the Louvre
today if it weren't for the fact that
it's so famous I don't know that it
would have caught my eye and that
certainly is the author's thesis and
that it's very familiarity is the thing
that made it so famous so the whole
notion of people preferring familiarity
is known as the mere-exposure effect and
this has been replicated in study after
study and if you show people a bunch of
images but repeat some of them more than
others people will tell you they prefer
the ones that have been repeated the
most now that scares me and the author
presents his hypothesis that this may
because it has evolutionary advantages
basically if a plant or animal was more
familiar to you it was something that
you were known and it hadn't killed you
yet then it probably was safe so that
familiarity gets baked into us as a
sense of something being okay and if you
really want to get freaked out by this
notion that familiarity rules all then
think about this people often conflate
familiarity with the truth all right let
that sink in people literally confuse
something being familiar with something
being true and when people are tested
they can usually tell the difference
between a false statement and a true
statement but if you begin to repeat the
false statement people especially older
people I thought it was a little cruel
to single them out but if that's what
the study's real so especially older
people begin to believe that it's true
even though when they were first asked
they identified it correctly as being
false over time because it becomes so
familiar they begin to believe that it's
true all right that one freaked me out
but is something that certainly in
politicians use the mere repetition of
something in grains itself I won't get
myself in trouble with any specific
examples but I'm sure you can all think
of some all right this begs the question
to me what role does quality play and
all of this if exposure is all that it
takes this quality even matter and
according to the author quality is
necessary but not sufficient and the
example that he gives is of this song
call me maybe by Carly Rae Jepsen it
failed to break into even the top 20
until Justin Bieber tweet
and when Justin Bieber tweeted it it
goes on to be a smash hit ends up being
one of the biggest songs of the decade
but you can literally see Justin Bieber
sweet as a demarcation point in its
popularity and so you know I won't get
into the debate of whether it's a good
song certainly a catchy song that it
needed that additional boost of the
exposure regardless of whether or not it
was a quality song so you really do need
both and you know if something's a great
piece of art a great song but nobody
ever hears it I think it's pretty
obvious that it's never going to catch
on so at some point you have to get it
out there another important factor is
what the author refers to as fluency
fluency is thoughts ideas anything
really that feels easy and if you've
ever wondered why thinking about some
things feels easy and thinking about
some things feels hard which I always
found very weird since it's just
thinking but this comes down to fluency
and he said words that rhyme words that
rhyme easily specifically so if I said
hey think of words that rhyme with hat
that's very easy has a high degree of
fluency but if I say think of words that
rhyme with strategy it's not as easy it
has what he calls disfluency it is
perceived as being harder and what's
fascinating is something that has
disfluency even though so let's say
let's give an example if I said think of
a movie that you like and then I asked
you to rate it and then I said name
seven things about that movie that you
like seven is just high enough that it
will cause disfluency will actually be
hard for you to think of seven things
that you liked about that movie and you
will begin to confuse the disfluency the
feeling of unease that you get from
trying to name seven things about it
that you like with the actual movie and
so if you ask people just to rate the
movie they'll give it a higher rating
than if you ask people to name seven
things about it that they like they'll
rate it lower because of that disfluency
so that concept of really understanding
that the ease with which something
presents itself is a big factor and he
brings it back round he being the author
brings it back round to this notion of
familiarity which is that you're really
looking for an optimum level of fluency
he
that it really is like if you want to
sell something that's familiar you need
to make it surprising and if you want to
sell something surprising you need to
make it a little bit familiar and he
gives the example of Star Wars really
achieving that optimum level of newness
and he said Star Wars is the perfect
example of this because it was familiar
it was really George Lucas was trying to
remake Flash Gordon but the studio
wouldn't sell him the rights and so
there's this sense of him riffing on
Flash Gordon that he referred to it
himself as making a Western in space
that he was taking some of the imagery
from samurai films which is while the
lightsabers so it was this hodgepodge of
all these really famous story types and
even referencing one of the most famous
stories in the genre from the TV serial
Flash Gordon and so all of that but done
in a new way and really struck that that
ultimate balance and then he goes on to
talk about how repetition especially in
music is really critical and so you get
the sense as he goes on in the book that
predictability familiarity exposure
which really creates predictability and
familiarity all of those things are
playing into what creates a hit but that
you have to really be ware of being
overly redundant but this notion of what
he calls repetition being the god
particle of music I found really really
fascinating and he said the reason for
this is that from an evolutionary
standpoint we were singing long before
we were able to speak and so things that
have a musical quality tend to increase
the fluency of something so one of the
examples that he gives is when you like
reading writing arithmetic I forget the
name of that but when you give something
that has not only the cadence of three
where they all start with are all of
these things rhyming being another
example all of these things that create
a great degree of fluency and people can
actually begin to believe something is
true simply because it is vocally
beautiful and he gives an example of how
something that is repeated in a song if
you then isolate and playback and he
does this in the in the audio book
really well worth listening to where if
you take somebody repeating something
over and over and over it begins to
sound like a song even though they
weren't singing which is really really
fascinating and definitely worth
checking out so you're just a to bring
it back you're looking for that optimal
level of newness you want to be just
surprising enough that people don't feel
that it's too repetitive and then
another thing along those lines words
that rhyme are perceived to be more true
that's another one of those things that
scares me but nonetheless things that
rhyme people consider to be true okay so
at the end of the book he's basically
saying that predicting the future is
almost entirely possible so he goes on
you know all the things about
familiarity exposure fluency okay that's
a hit
but then how do you look forward and try
to create that out of nothing and he
gives this really incredible example of
the song rock around the clock and if
you listen to it now because rock around
the clock goes on to be one of the
greatest highest performing songs of all
time one of the most popular songs most
played did really well on the charts but
it didn't do well until the second time
it was released and the first time it
was released was only a year before and
he talks about how the context of
something really matters and that subtle
shifts in context subtle shifts in the
way that something is presented can have
a massive impact so when the song rock
around the clock first came out it was
b-side on an album it was more or less
ignored it very briefly appeared on the
Billboard top 100 but then very quickly
disappeared goes away everybody thinks
that it's gonna be forgotten and then a
year later it ends up being in the title
sequence of the movie Blackboard Jungle
and then ends up being a smash hit and
goes on to be one of the greatest
selling albums of all time and he said
nobody ever would have predicted that
like nobody nobody did it had come out
of here before and nobody expected
anything out of that song and it didn't
really do much so the fact that people
then try to go back and explain why it
ended up being a hit he said is how
people
end up convincing themselves that they
can predict something that they really
can't because in reality as context
changes as the what he calls the chaos
of culture changes one's ability to look
into the future and predict what's going
to work is is virtually non-existent and
that's where artists come into the
picture and really in his words are
making something internal for them
almost turning a blind eye to the fact
that this will ultimately be put out
into the world and when you get it just
right when the contextual cues of the
culture happened to line up with the
message that you're saying then you can
have a smash hit and a great example
that he gives is actually in the world
of fashion and he talks about how in the
90s it was such a big deal to wear the
huge logo of the more expensive brands
and it really said something about you
to be able to afford that and to wear
that and to you know make that a part of
your identity but when the Great
Recession hit that really fell at a
favor in fast fashion companies like
Zara and H&M were the ones that
skyrocketed to popularity but people
couldn't have predicted that that
massive cultural change was gonna happen
and they couldn't have predicted the way
that people were going to respond to
that so you get these massive changes
across all industries based on what's
going on in culture now he does take the
time at the very end of the book to
prognosticate a little bit about what
the future of hits are gonna look like
talking about Facebook talking about the
way that we can now get real-time data
about what people are actually doing
versus what they say they do and which
by the way is very very interesting in
terms of people say one thing but are
actually doing another and that's
something that we see in the analytics
of our own footage like for instance I
know that statistically most of you will
not make it to this part in the book of
you because we know what the attenuation
is of people watching and listening to
our content so it's really really
fascinating and what do you do like do I
just piece out and like wrap up now
because I know most people don't make it
to this or do I keep going and it goes
back to that notion of there is some
element of an artist is just creating
for themselves and then ultimately he
sort of the the bet for lack of a better
word that he makes on the future of hits
is what he calls the Disney method of
total merchandising and he talks about
how there is this self-reinforcing loop
between the artistic creation and the
commerce and literally this was so
fascinating to me because this is
literally the bet that we're making at
impact theory our bet is that there is a
self-reinforcing ideological loop
between the creation and the ideological
echo that people want to surround
themselves with through merchandising
and hearing like I even though I
understood Disney and that's literally
been a driving factor for us I didn't
understand it as well as he presented it
and how powerfully merchandising has
driven Disney from the beginning and I
can't believe more people don't do this
and I will just tell the rest of the
world the part that you're missing what
Disney understood is their content fit
into a very specific niche people knew
what it meant to go for a Disney film
and therefore the Disney characters
represented something very specific
that's exactly what we're doing at
impact theory it's about empowerment so
everything that we're gonna touch has to
do with empowerment so all the things
you're going to surround yourself with
whether you're buying a t-shirt a plush
doll a wallpaper or toothbrush whatever
it's all gonna echo that notion of
empowerment and our bet is that the
world is swinging so hard that way and
people are moving out of the fixed
mindset into the growth mindset that
that is really gonna be the bet on
what's gonna be a hit so reading this
book was utterly fascinating because it
was somebody really putting words really
encapsulating exactly what I believe is
happening and so all the while I'm like
he is literally telling me that I'm not
gonna be able to predict the PUE be able
to predict the future and I believe him
and yet I believe I'm right about the
future and he actually covers that in
the book and he talks about how you need
to be just a little wrong at exactly the
right time because if everyone agreed
with my thinking then everyone would be
doing this but it's because just a very
few number of people really get that
this is where the world is going that I
can talk so openly about this and know
that we're gonna out execute people and
do it faster than people but that we're
just a little bit wrong we're just a
little bit ahead of the curve and that
the world really will catch up
or and there's a great Scott Belsky
quilt let me see if I can pull this up
yep when 99% of people doubt your idea
you're either gravely wrong or about to
make history all right after reading
this book I have to tell you I think
we're about to make history I think that
the stuff that he covers in this book is
utterly fascinating and tells me that
that is probably hubris and that my
ability to predict the future is
virtually zero but it is always the
people that have the guts that think
that they are right they're right at the
moment when the shift is about to happen
that place a bet that end up making the
next big hit all right guys this is a
weekly show I am reading this stuff for
myself I'll be completely honest but I
love to put it all together and
summarize it for you guys I hope that
you're getting as much out of this as I
am and as always I hope that you go read
the book don't think you've gotten even
the majority of what he goes into I am I
have butt scratched the surface so guys
be sure to subscribe so you can get the
next one and until next time my friends
be legendary
take care